chore: Add open telemetry to cypress to allow us to monitor the performance of the app overtime (#26305)
cypress-io/cypress: packages/telemetry/README.md

# @packages/telemetry

> This package is convenience wrapper built around open telemetry to allow us to gain insights around how cypress is used and help us prevent performance regressions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This package is a convenience wrapper built around [open telemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) to allow us to gain insights around how Cypress is used and help us prevent performance regressions.
```

## tl;dr

> Telemetry in cypress is off by default. To enable telemetry in cypress set `CYPRESS_INTERNAL_ENABLE_TELEMETRY="true"`.

Reviewer: Suggest capitalizing `Cypress` where appropriate.

> Telemetry in cypress is off by default. To enable telemetry in cypress set `CYPRESS_INTERNAL_ENABLE_TELEMETRY="true"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Telemetry in cypress is off by default. To enable telemetry in cypress set `CYPRESS_INTERNAL_ENABLE_TELEMETRY="true"`.
```
```suggestion
Telemetry in cypress is disabled by default. To enable telemetry in cypress set `CYPRESS_INTERNAL_ENABLE_TELEMETRY="true"`.
```

Telemetry data is sent to the cloud `/telemetry` endpoint.

> For the **cypress cloud project only** we forward the telemetry data to honeycomb. For all other projects telemetry data is not stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the **cypress cloud project only** we forward the telemetry data to [honeycomb](https://ui.honeycomb.io/cypress). For all other projects telemetry data is not stored.
```

> Staging: https://ui.honeycomb.io/cypress/environments/cypress-app-staging/datasets/cypress-app/home
> 
> Prod: https://ui.honeycomb.io/cypress/environments/cypress-app/datasets/cypress-app/home

Reviewer 2: More of a convenience to just click the link without having to copy/paste. Are these instances public at least for viewing?
```suggestion
Environments:
* [Staging](https://ui.honeycomb.io/cypress/environments/cypress-app-staging/datasets/cypress-app/home)
* [Production](https://ui.honeycomb.io/cypress/environments/cypress-app/datasets/cypress-app/home)
```

## Design

> At a very high level we use open telemetry to collect data and it to honeycomb. There are three different processes that collect data, the server, the child process and the browser. The child process and browser forward collected spans to the server where the telemetry data is encrypted and sent to an entrypoint on the Cypress server. The Cypress server then decrypts the telemetry data and decides what to do with it. Today, if the attached project is the Cypress project we forward the data to honeycomb, all other projects are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a very high level we use open telemetry to collect data and send it to honeycomb. There are three different processes that collect data, the server, the child process and the browser. The child process and browser forward collected spans to the server where the telemetry data is encrypted and sent to the Cypress Cloud. The Cypress Cloud then decrypts the telemetry data and decides what to do with it. Today, if the attached project is the Cypress project we forward the data to honeycomb, all other projects are ignored.
```

Reviewer 2: should there be a colon after `collect data`?

There are two different singletons included in the telemetry package, one for node and one for browser. They have different requirements to set up.

### Node

To access the node telemetry singleton use the default export.

```js
const { telemetry } = require('@packages/telemetry')

telemetry.init({options})
```

The node telemetry instance has a couple of exporters to choose from, the `OTLPTraceExporterCloud` and `OTLPTraceExporterIpc`.

#### OTLPTraceExporterCloud

The `OTLPTraceExporterCloud` will send telemetry as an http request to the supplied url and can be configured to encrypt the data. Within Cypress the exporter will encrypt data by default and send it to the cloud telemetry endpoint.

```js
const { OTLPTraceExporterCloud } = require('@packages/telemetry')

const exporter = new OTLPTraceExporterCloud({
  url: apiRoutes.telemetry(),
  encryption,
})
```

When sending data to the cloud telemetry endpoint you must attach the project id to the exporter as a header when it is available.

```js
const { telemetry, OTLPTraceExporterCloud } = require('@packages/telemetry')

(telemetry.exporter() as OTLPTraceExporterCloud)?.attachProjectId(config.projectId)

```

> When developing Cypress locally it is possible to override the telemetry endpoint and send unencrypted data to your own honeycomb instance. This is recommended when verifying newly added spans and any sort of local telemetry development.

Reviewer 2: should we link to this in `start-cypress`?

Author: done

```js
const { OTLPTraceExporterCloud } = require('@packages/telemetry')
const exporter = new OTLPTraceExporterCloud({
  url: 'https://api.honeycomb.io/v1/traces',
  headers: {
    'x-honeycomb-team': 'key',
  },
})
```

#### OTLPTraceExporterIPC

The `OTLPTraceExporterCloud` will send telemetry as an ipc message, the receiver of the message is responsible for forwarding it on to an OTEL collector. This is used in the child process. The ipc connection must be attached before telemetry data will be sent.

```js
const { OTLPTraceExporterIPC } = require('@packages/telemetry')
const exporter = new OTLPTraceExporterIpc.OTLPTraceExporterIpc()

exporter.attachIPC(ipc)
```

The `OTLPTraceExporterCloud` exporter has a handy send method you can use to forward on the telemetry requests.

```js
const { OTLPTraceExporterIPC } = require('@packages/telemetry')

> (telemetry.exporter()as OTLPTraceExporterCloud)?.send(data, () => {}, (err) => {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(telemetry.exporter() as OTLPTraceExporterCloud)?.send(data, () => {}, (err) => {
```

  debug('error exporting telemetry data %s', err)
})

```

### Browser

To access the browser telemetry singleton use the browser export directly.

```js
import { telemetry } from '@packages/telemetry/src/browser'

telemetry.init({options})
```

The browser singleton is also stored on window, in some cases when the telemetry package is included in multiple packages you can use the `attach` method to retrieve and setup the singleton from the instance saved on window.

```js
import { telemetry } from '@packages/telemetry/src/browser'

telemetry.attach()
```

The browser telemetry instance only supports the websocket exporter and the websocket must be attached to the exporter for spans to be sent.

```js
telemetry.attachWebSocket(ws)
```

The receiver of the websocket message is responsible for forwarding it on to an OTEL collector.

The `OTLPTraceExporterCloud` exporter has a handy send method you can use to forward on the telemetry requests.

```js
const { OTLPTraceExporterIPC } = require('@packages/telemetry')

> (telemetry.exporter()as OTLPTraceExporterCloud)?.send(data, () => {}, (err) => {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(telemetry.exporter() as OTLPTraceExporterCloud)?.send(data, () => {}, (err) => {
```

#### Start

Starting a span indicates the start of a point that you with to time.

We've created a method for starting spans ourselves to allow us to start active spans without wrapping the observed code in a callback. We can also find previously started spans and stop them in other events.

```js
const { telemetry } = require('@packages/telemetry')

// The returned span is an otel span with all it's properties.
const span = telemetry.start({name: 'span'})

eventToTime()

// Attributes can be placed on a span to inform parameters that may influence timing, such as a filename.
span?.setAttributes({
  fileName: 'filename',
})

// Spans must be ended for them to be sent to the telemetry endpoint.
span?.end()
```

#### Get

Sometimes spans aren't able to be closed in the same function that they're opened, or there are multiple paths that could close the span.

**Warning!** duplicate span names are not handled and the original span will no longer be able to be found.

```js
const { telemetry } = require('@packages/telemetry')

// The returned span is an otel span with all it's properties.

> const span = telemetry.getSpan('span')

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning that the span may not exist if the no op telemetry is used or if the span was never created, which makes the implied `span?.end()` a bit clearer?

Author: done

// Spans must be ended for them to be sent to the telemetry endpoint.
span?.end()
```

#### Active Spans

When you set a span as active, subsequent spans will be nested as children to the active span while it is not ended. You can override being set as a child span if you mark the span as a root span.

There can only be one active span at a time, but they will nest.

**Warning!** Active spans must be ended or the child relationship will be broken in your telemetry collector.

```js
const { telemetry } = require('@packages/telemetry')

// The returned span is an otel span with all it's properties.
const activeSpan = telemetry.start({name: 'activeSpan', active})

// This span will be set as a child of 'activeSpan'

> const chidSpan = telemetry.start({name: 'childSpan'})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const childSpan = telemetry.start({name: 'childSpan'})
```

// This span will not be set as a child of 'activeSpan'

> const chidSpan = telemetry.start({name: 'childSpan', attachType: 'root' })

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const childSpan = telemetry.start({name: 'childSpan', attachType: 'root' })
```
